---
title: 'Discrete Random Variables and Probability Mass Functions'
date: 2020-04-16
permalink: /posts/2020/03/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - probability
  - probability mass function
---

When I first started studying statistics, I used the concept of 
random variables many times without really knowing what a random 
variable was. We used it in hypothesis testing, model fitting, 
and countless other domains. In this post, we will build off of 
our previously established probability foundations to understand 
just how important random variables are.

Let's begin with the formal definition 

**(Mathematical Definition)** A random variable is a **mapping** or **function**:

$$X: \Omega \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$

that assigns a real number $X(\omega)$ to each outcome $\omega$.

$\Omega$ and $\omega$ should look familiar since we have discussed them at length in our previous posts. 
Nevertheless, this definition can be confusing for several reasons. First, what real numbers are we assigning each 
outcome to? Also, why do we assign any real number at all? Why do we **need** random variables?

All these questions will be answered, so just keep reading.

Let's tie this concept back to pop culture. In a previous post we discussed the Infinity Stones from the 
Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). These stones are central to the narrative arc that courses through the MCU's 
"Phases", also referred to as the "The Infinity Saga". Let's start by assigning a value to each of the 
infinity stones that represents their overall capabilities. 

Lets assume I assign the following overall scores: 

(a) Soul: 6 (most powerful)

(b) Power: 5

(c) Time: 4

(d) Mind: 3

(e) Reality: 2 

(f) Space: 1 (least powerful)

I think the reasons why I chose these values is for another day. 
**We let the random variable $X$ be the sum of scores of the two infinity stones chosen**. 
I realize that per universe there are only six stones, so let's also assume that we borrowed 6 identical 
stones from an alternate reality using the quantum realm. We know that there are 36 possible sample outcomes 
in our sample space $\Omega$:

| $\omega$          | $X(\omega)$   | 
| -------------     |:-------------:| 
| (Space, Space)    | 2             |
| (Space, Reality)  | 3             | 
| (Space, Mind)     | 4             | 
| (Space, Time)     | 5             |
| (Space, Power)    | 6             |
| (Space, Soul)     | 7             |
| ...               | ...           |

So, now we have all our ingredients in the random variable recipe, first we described the experiment 
(choosing two infinity stones) and second we gave a value to each sample outcome. These set of values 
$X$ is considered a **random variable**. Keep in mind a random variable does not take on a single 
value like in algebra, it can assume any value in a given set ($\{2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, ... \}$). It assumes 
any one of these values randomly, hence the name "random" variable. How does this relate back to probability? 
Let's take a look at the following notation

$$\mathbb{P} (X = x)$$

which is "shorthand" for:

$$\mathbb{P} ( \{ \omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) = x \})$$

"$\mathbb{P} (X = x)$" simply means what is the probability that the random variable $X$ takes on 
the value $x$. So let's go back to our example to really understand this equation. Suppose we construct 
a matrix of the sum of scores after choosing two infinity stones:

|         | Space   | Reality   | Mind  | Time  | Power | Soul |
| Space   | 2       | 3         | 4     | 5     | 6     | 7 |
| Reality | 3       | 4         | 5     | 6     | 7     | 8 |
| Mind    | 4       | 5         | 6     | 7     | 8     | 9 |
| Time    | 5       | 6         | 7     | 8     | 9     | **10** |
| Power   | 6       | 7         | 8     | 9     | **10**| 11 |
| Soul    | 7       | 8         | 9     | **10**| 11    | 12 |  

What is the probability of having a power score equal to 10? Well essentially this question 
is asking $\mathbb{P} (X = 10) = \, ?$. We know that

$$\mathbb{P} (X = 10) = \mathbb{P} (\{ \omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) = 10 \})$$

$$\mathbb{P} (X = 10) = \mathbb{P} (\{ (Power, Power), (Soul, Time), (Time, Soul) \})$$

$$\mathbb{P} (X = 10) = \frac{3}{36}$$

There you have it! Now we understand the relationship between random variables and probability! 
The example we just discussed is considered one of two types of random variables. 
It is referred to as a **discrete random variable** since it can assume a countable (link) 
number of values. The second type of random variable is referred to as a **continuous random variable**
and will be discussed in detail in the next post.
